All right so here we have our second problem for intervals of increase and decrease.
So find the intervals of increase and decrease for f of x equals x squared over X minus 1.
So go ahead and pause the video and give it a shot.
All right so let's go ahead and do it together.
So the first thing you'll notice is that we are actually dividing two functions.
We have x squared over X minus one.
So when you have this you need to use the quotient rule.
So first step to find the intervals of increase and decrease is to find the derivative of f of x.
SO derivative of f of x and let's apply the quotient rule.
Remember that's pro minus the B.S. That's than a Monnick that we use.
So we place our repeats.
We have x squared times X minus one and we place it again.
X squared times X minus 1.
So that's a PR place repeats.
Now we're going to do the 0 for pro and that is the derivatives of the outer functions.
So the derivative here and the derivative here finally we have the other part which is minus and then
B-S is bottom squared.
So that's going to be X minus 1 to the second power.
Let's go ahead and find the derivatives.
So we have derivative of x squared.
We just bring down a dictator to and X and then we substitute a less powerful leader.
That gives us a 1 in the exponent.
So we don't market.
So that's 2 x times X minus 1.
Mine is x squared.
Times a derivative of X minus 1.
So again remember the derivative of X is just one.
Because when we bring down our dictator it's a one times substitute less powerful leader.
X 2 0 is just one and then minus the derivative of one is simply zero sum minus zero like this.
And we divide again over X Minus One squared.
Let's go ahead and distribute.
So remember this 2 x goes here and goes here.
So two x times x.
Remember that when we multiply axes we add the exponents so X to 1 times x 2 the 1 is X to the two and
don't forget the two so two x times X is 2 x to the second power and then 2 x times negative 1 is minus
2 x and then on this side we have 1 times one is 1 minus zero is 1.
So it's this whole thing is 1 times x squared is just x squared.
So we had a minus here.
Mine is x squared.
Everything over X minus 1 squared.
And then finally simplify.
We have two terms that have x squared.
We have this one and we have this one.
So what we do is we keep the x squared and we work with the coefficients.
So it's two minus one.
Remember if nothing's there.
It's a 1.
So two minus one is choose 1.
So that means that we get X quid.
Let me repeat that again 2 x squared minus X squared is x squared right.
And then we had minus 2 x
everything over X minus 1 squared.
All right.
That was step 1.
Now for step 2
remember that what we need to do is find values that make this derivative equal to zero or undefined.
In this case because we have a fraction the numbers that make it equal to zero are the ones that make
the top equal to zero.
And the numbers that make it undefined are the ones that make the bottom equal to zero.
So topical to zero whole thing equals zero bottom equal to zero.
Whole thing is undefined.
So let's set both the top and the bottom equal to zero to find the numbers that make this derivative
equal to zero and undefined.
So starting with the top so that's x squared minus 2 x equal to zero
and just we don't forget let's grab this bottom and set it equal to zero as well.
So we'll do that here.
X minus 1 squared equals zero.
All right.
So starting with this one is this equal to zero.
Well it's not exactly clear just by looking at it.
So let's try and factor what is common to these two terms.
Is it that two.
Not really because this one doesn't have to multiplying and has it in the exponent but not multiplying.
So what these two have in common is one X right.
Because this one has x twice and this one has X once but we can take the X from both ends.
So we've factored out and if we took out one X from here what do we have left the other X and we took
out one X from here.
We only have the two.
So that's minus two.
All right.
So remember this needs to be equal to zero.
Remember that when things are multiplying.
If one of them is equal to zero then the whole thing is equal to zero.
So if this is zero or if this is zero the whole thing is going to be equal to zero.
So just by looking at it if we set X equal to zero then the whole thing is going to be equal to zero.
That means that one of our critical numbers is going to be zero itself.
I'll put these here zero.
So when is this one equal to zero x minus 2.
Well we can solve for that.
And let me separate these two because remember this is the top being equal to zero.
And this is the bottom being equal to zero.
So let's find that out X minus 2 is equal to zero.
You maybe know the answer already because it's obvious but I like to do it step by step and we add to
them both sides.
Cancels out here and we have bring down the x x equals zero plus two equals two.
So this is zero when X equals 2.
And it makes sense because two minus two is zero.
So our second critical number is two Finally let's find out when the functions defined.
In other words when the bottom is equal to zero which is what we have here.
So I mean think about it.
One is this equals zero.
So remember what we have is X minus 1 squared.
So that's X minus 1 times X minus 1.
Y is x minus 1 equal to zero.
Well obviously we could do the same process that we did here you know X minus 1 equal to zero.
Move the one to the other side etc..
But just by looking at it we can tell that this is zero when X equals 1.
Why.
Because if you plug in one here you're going to get one minus one that's going to give you zero and
zero squared is zero.
All right.
So this is 0 when X equals 1.
That means that our third critical number is 1.
So we have 3 0 2 and 1.
Now we have this we go to our third step which you remember is just pretty much classifying the intervals
for either increase or decrease.
And we do that using test values.
So again we just go back to our number line that we love so much this one here and we plug in the numbers
in ascending order.
Remember like I said before if you go to the left they get smaller.
And if you go to the right they get bigger.
So we have zero to 1 but if we order them from smallest to biggest they would be zero 1 and 2.
So we need to find test values to the left of 0 between 0 and 1 between 1 and 2 and greater than 2 to
the right of two.
All right.
So to the left of 0 Let's pick negative 1 between 0 and 1.
Let's pick 0.5
between 1 and 2.
Let's pick 1.5
and greater than two.
Let's pick three.
All right.
So we have four test values that we need to plug into the first derivative and find out what the sign
is.
So let's go ahead and do this.
Let's plug in negative 1 so prime of negative 1.
So the first derivative is here.
So let's go ahead and plug in negative 1.
So we have negative 1 squared minus two times negative on over negative 1 minus ones squared and negative
1 squared is one.
Then we have negative two times and negative 1.
So negative times a negative is a positive and one times two is just to over negative one minus one.
So if you owe one daughter and then you spend one more you owe $2.
So this is negative too but it's squared because it's squared.
Negative 2 squared is negative times a negative it becomes a positive.
And two attempts two is four.
So this becomes for and or answer is three over four.
All right.
This is a positive number.
That means that to the left of 0 we have a positive derivative.
All right let's keep going.
Let's plug in
0.5.
And of course I'm going to run out of space.
So 0.5
plugged into this derivative that's going to give us 0.5 squared.
Mine is two times zero point five.
That's over
0.5 minus 1 squared.
Right.
So what is this 3.5 squared is point twenty five minus 2 times 0.5.
That's going to give you one and it's a negative sum minus one over 0.5 minus one is negative 0.5 negative
0.5 squared is points 25.
So that's a positive point twenty five and that is going to give us point twenty five minus one negative
points seventy five over points 25 the answer of point seventy five over 0.25 is actually three.
You can try it in a calculator if you want and remember that because we have a negative over a positive
difference signs the answer is negative.
So we're this 0.5 is between the zero and the one we have a negative derivative.
All right.
And let's go to our third test value.
You know what since I'm running out of space I'll go ahead and take this out which if you're taking
notes you should have this already.
And if you didn't do the problem you should be taking notes.
Or if you did the problem and you see something different that I got versus what you got like maybe
you got negative to the left of 0 then you should be doing this problem again until you get it right.
All right so let me go ahead and take this out.
All right so let's try our third value which is 1.5
prime of 1.5
0 and of course let me write the derivative here.
So derivative
is x squared minus 2 x over X minus 1 squared.
All right so plug it in 1.5 into this derivative.
So that is 1.5 squared minus two times 1.5
over 1.5 minus one squared.
So if you try it on your calculator you'll see that 1.5 squared is two point twenty five minus two times
a 1.5 is three to minus three over 1.5 minus one point five and point five squared.
We already know is points 25.
So two point twenty five minus three is negative points.
Seventy five
and this over points 25 is actually the same as this one.
See that.
So negative over a positive is a negative.
And point seventy five point twenty five is negative three.
So same value that we got for this one.
Therefore between 1 and 2 it's also negative see that.
And finally let's go to our last test points at Pryme of three that should be a lot easier.
So this blog entry into the derivative.
So we have three squared minus two times three
over three minus one squared.
So that gives us 3 squared which is nine minus two times three which is 6 three minus one is two and
two squared is four.
So that is nine minus six three over four which funny.
We got the same answer over here.
So three or four is positive.
So to the right of two we have positive derivative with this information we can get our intervals.
So to the left of 0 is positive derivative.
So it's increasing.
So from negative infinity up to 0 it is increasing Well abbreviated like this then from 0 to 1 it is
decreasing but also from 1 to 2.
So we can just combine them together in one interval and say from zero to two.
Right.
Instead of saying zero to one and wanted to because the function is increasing in both of those we combined
them together into one and we say that the function is decreasing on that interval.
And then we have our last one which is to the right of two to the right of two is positive.
So from 2 to positive infinity
the original function is increasing
and that's it for this problem.
So the only difference between this problem and the other one is that in this problem we had a bottom.
So we also needed to set it equal to zero to find the intervals of increase and decrease every time
we have a fraction have a bottom.
And if you have a bottom you need to check when that bottom is equal to zero and use those test values
in your number line as well as the numbers that make the top equal to zero.
And we are done.
All right I'll see you in the next tutorial is.